it is and it can do a lot of good things
if we need it and we will we will have
it all completed signing it in just a
little while right after I'm finished
with this conference I'll be signing it
it's prepared to go so we will be
invoking the defense production Act last
week I signed an emergency declaration
under the Stafford Act which is you know
we invoked previously and which
activated FEMA's National Response
Coordination Center FEMA now is fully
engaged at the highest levels today FEMA
is activated in every region we are at
level 1 level 1 being the highest level
which we will work with and we've been
working with him I've done a lot of work
with FEMA they're incredible it's always
been on hurricanes or tornados they're
right now in Tennessee a large group
working in Tennessee have been
incredible that was tragic event Alabama
last year also a tornado and then
obviously the numerous hurricanes and
different locations that were in some
cases very devastating and in every case
FEMA came through this is a very
different kind of a work for FEMA but
they will come through as they always do
we have tremendous people tremendous
talent in FEMA we're sending upon
request the two hospital ships they're
being prepared right now they're massive
ships they're the big white ships with
the Red Cross on the sides one is called
the mercy and the other is called the
Comfort and they are in tip-top shape
they soon will be they're getting ready
to come up to New York I spoke with
Governor Cuomo about it he's excited
about it and I also we haven't made the
final determination as to where it's
going to go in the West Coast the
comfort is located now in San Diego and
it's going to be will be picking the
destination fairly shortly so those two
ships are being prepared to go and they
can be
over the next week or so depending on
need earlier this week the first
clinical trial of the vaccine candidate
for the virus began in Washington State
as you probably know the genetic
sequence of the virus was first
published in January but thanks to the
unprecedented partnership between the
FDA NIH and the private sector we've
reached human trials for the vaccine
just eight weeks later that's a record
by many many months it used to take
years to do this and and now we did it
just in a very short while that's the
fastest development in history of what
we're doing with regard to the vaccine
making very very big progress today I
can announce further steps to expand
testing capacity we're working with
several groups to determine if the self
swab a much easier process than the
current process that's not very nice to
do I can tell you because I did it but
we have a current process that's a
little bit difficult if you haven't done
the the groups are working on
determining if a self swab by an
individual is as effective as the other
the others very effective very accurate
but we're going to see if we can do a
self swab which is would be a lot more
popular I can tell you that so and that
would be administered also by a health
official but it would be a lot easier to
do the the fact is that the health
professionals would it would free it
would free up a lot let me just say if
the self swab is what it is it's a self
Swope you do it yourself the other has
to be issued by a health professional
and it's something that is quite
difficult and we think it's working out
for the self swab and if it would test
positive the people would go and they
would do what they have to do but we
think that's probably working out I've
asked the FDA to cut through the red
tape and reduce regulatory barriers we
are
looking at some very exciting things and
I'm going to be holding the second news
conference either today we're going to
talk about the FDA some things are
happening that are quite exciting and
we're gonna be doing that either later
today or tomorrow fairly early tomorrow
so we'll see what happens but the FDA my
instructions is I've been working very
very hard on a number of developments
and we'll be discussing them with you
later today or tomorrow and this
afternoon I'll be meeting with nurses on
the front lines of the battle against
the virus they're truly American heroes
they want to get it done they're
incredible people so we're gonna be
meeting with nurses and actually look
forward to that very brave they're
taking a lot of risk and they they have
done an incredible job and they never
complained today I'm also announcing
that the Department of Housing and Urban
Development is providing immediate
relief to renters and homeowners by
suspending all foreclosures and
evictions until the end of April so
we're working very closely with dr. ben
Carson and everybody from HUD every
generation of Americans has been called
to make shared sacrifices for the good
of the nation in World War two young
people in their teenage years
volunteered to fight they wanted to
fight so badly because they love our
country workers refused to go home and
slept in factory floors to keep assembly
lines running and you know the numbers
of ships that they built during World
War two to this day has never nothing
like that has ever been equal they were
doing ships on a literally on a daily
basis nobody's ever seen anything like
it
and to this day nobody's seen anything
like that what they were able to do
during World War two and now it's our
time we must sacrifice together because
we are all in this together and we'll
come through together it's the invisible
enemy that's always the toughest enemy
the invisible enemy but we're going to
defeat the invisible enemy I think we're
going to do it even faster than we
thought and it will be a complete
victory it'll be a total victory
so we'll have a second conference again
having to do with the FDA and this I
think it's going to be potentially a
very exciting news conference and we
will do it as quickly as we can so
whether it's today or tomorrow and I'll
with that ask Mike Pence to say a few
words and thank you very much thank you
mr. president
the White House coronavirus task force
met this morning and now that we have
cases in all 50 states we're continuing
to move out on the president's call to
bring the full resources of the federal
government a full partnership with every
state and territory the full power of
the American economy to support
businesses and families as the president
says to us and every day we'll do
whatever it takes we're all in this
together
yesterday the president met with the
tourism industry executives and also had
an engaging discussion with all the top
companies in our industrial and medical
supply chain the president as you all
are were also announced today that by
mutual consent the northern border to
Canada will be closed to non-essential
travel this does not include essential
travel or the transit of goods but it
was through mutual discussion that took
place this morning between the president
and Prime Minister Trudeau and the
Department of Homeland Security will be
effectuating that decision president
spoke with some of the nation's top
business leaders today again to speak
about the supply chain in the country
and for our part we're going to be
conducting a conference call later today
with state and local health officials to
renew our ongoing commitment of
cooperation and collaboration as the
president said last week in signing the
Stafford Act
he stood up the National Response
Coordination Center and today at the
president's direction FEMA has gone to
level 1 FEMA's mission is to support
disasters that are locally executed
state managed and federally supportive
and tomorrow the president will be
hosting all the nation's governors from
a video
at FEMA to ensure that they have full
connection to all of the activated
regions for FEMA going forward and with
regard to testing I'm pleased to report
that we're increasing the number of
tests being performed by the thousands
every day thanks to the public-private
partnership that President Trump forged
with commercial laboratories around the
country our health experts tell us to
remind every American it's important to
remember people without symptoms should
not get tested we want to make sure that
the supply of testing is there for those
that need it most or are symptomatic or
in the vulnerable population dr. deborah
birx in a moment we'll address the
progress that we're making on testing
the infection rate our recommendations
to every America as well as some
important new findings about the impact
on youth that we're gaining from data
that's coming in from Europe that'll be
important to every every American on the
subject of supplies and the president
has our task force extremely focused as
the president mentioned yesterday
mentioned that he's invoking the defense
production act today secretary Esper in
a few moments will describe the ongoing
efforts that the Department of Defense
is taking to make medical resources
available secretary Robert Wilkie will
announce decisions the VA has made to
expand hospital capacity within their
system also with regard to medical
personnel at the president's Direction
HHS is issuing a regulation today that
will allow all doctors and medical
professionals to practice across state
lines to meet the needs of hospitals
that may arise in adjoining areas in
addition to that we are again today
asking every American and our medical
community leaders and hospitals to
partner with us in delaying elective
procedures across the country in our
health care system to ensure that
medical supplies and medical capacity go
where they're needed most Seema Verma
will describe guidance that CMS will be
issuing on that front
and finally just I want to remind every
Amer
of the president's 15 day guidance to
slow the spread we are grateful for
members of the media and the general
public that are adhering to these
sharing them with neighbors and friends
all of our experts continue to believe
that if every American will do their
part and embrace and put into practice
these principles that we can
significantly limit the reach of the
corona virus in the weeks and months
ahead thank you very much thank you
Thank You mr. president mr. vice
president so you know we continue to
look at data every single day there are
concerning reports coming out of France
and Italy about some young people
getting seriously ill and very seriously
ill in the icy use we think part of this
may be that people heeded the early data
coming out of China and coming out of
South Korea without the elderly or those
with pre-existing medical conditions
were at particular risk it may have been
that the millennial generation our
largest generation our future generation
that will carry us through for the next
multiple decades there may be
disproportional a number of infections
among that group and so even if it's a
rare occurrence it may be seen more
frequently in that group and be evident
now so we're looking at that information
very carefully we have not seen any
significant mortality in the children
but we are concerned about the early
reports coming out of Italy and France
so again I'm going to call on that
generation that's part of that group
that brought us innovation particularly
throughout all of their ability to look
around corners and skip through games
and I always went level by level I
didn't realize that you could go from
level three to level seven that's what
they've taught us they look for things
that we don't see we need them to be
healthy so again not all in calling on
you to adhere what's in the guidance but
to really ensure that each and every one
of you are protecting each other and so
we cannot have these
large gatherings that continue to occur
throughout the country for people who
are off work to then be socializing in
large groups and spreading the virus you
have the potential then to spread it to
someone who does have a condition that
none of us knew about and caused them to
have a disastrous outcome finally on the
testing piece and what we're learning I
know you know last week and bringing the
private sector I think what has been
exciting to me over the last two and a
half weeks is to see this administration
harness the full capacity of the private
sector understanding that a lot of our
solutions that we need to confront this
virus a lot rely on the private sector
bringing the private sector commercial
labs was critical into this process we
are now beginning to see that they have
spread out in a prioritized way because
we ask them to prioritize the regions
that were mostly affected and so you
still may have difficulty getting tests
in areas that do not have significant
cases we've had them prioritize the
regions where we need diagnosis and
their diagnostic percent remember I told
you South Korea was under 4% so 96% of
people were negative the last report
we've seen from the laboratories have
about a 7 plus percent positivity rate
still 93 plus percent or 92 percent are
negative but I think that's encouraging
to me personally that we're prioritizing
appropriately to those areas that have
the greatest need today and yesterday
thermo Fisher
pushed out most of their laboratory
testing capacity and that will
dramatically increase that platform and
the ability to run additional tests in
addition to Roche so I appreciate
everybody's attention to these numbers
I'm excited that we've prioritized where
the need was the greatest but again
please follow the guidance and please
make sure in every report that you're
putting out that you're talking about
the presidential guidance to actually
stop the spread of this virus thank you
so good afternoon everyone and I want to
provide an update on DoD's coronavirus
up efforts as we continue to focus on
our three priorities that's first of all
protecting our personnel and their
families second safeguarding our
national security mission capabilities
and third of course supporting the
administration's whole-of-government
approach first of all though I do want
to assure the American people that the
United States military remains ready and
capable of defending the country and our
interests abroad now with that the
department is leaning forward in our
response to kovat 19 we have issued
international and domestic travel
restrictions to all DoD personnel and
Families that should dramatically reduce
potential exposure to the virus those
have been in place for some time now as
I announced yesterday the department
defense will make available up to five
million n95 respirator masks and other
personal protective equipment from our
own strategic reserves to the Department
of Health and Human Services for
distribution the first 1 million masks
will be available immediately we're also
prepared to distribute to HHS up to
2,000 operational deployables
ventilators for use as needed yesterday
I was at Fort Detrick Maryland which is
probably the military's a premier
Research Institute where I got updated
on the incredible work our people are
doing as part of the interagency team to
work on vaccines and therapeutics they
are making great progress there we also
have announced that we've certified our
16th lab or will soon certified our 16th
lab to help with processing tests from
across the country additionally I have
directed as the president mentioned that
the hospital ships mercy and comfort be
prepared to deploy to increase the
nation's medical capacity and we have
also alerted a variety of filled and
expeditionary hospitals to be prepared
to deploy as well as needed based on
direction from the commander in chief
today a leadership from the Army Corps
of Engineers is in New York meeting with
Governor Cuomo and his team I spoke with
Governor Cuomo yesterday and other
governors I will be speaking to more in
the coming days to make sure that they
know what DoD can provide through our
system to and to address their needs in
my conversations with governor's and
members of Congress about the ADIZ
resources I
made it clear that we will continue to
support the administration's
comprehensive efforts and the country
every step of the way while ensuring our
nation's security remains the top
priority I want to conclude by thanking
again all of our service members and
their families who have been affected by
this outbreak they are all great heroes
we are continue to support them
throughout this we are all in this
together thank you all very much so
yesterday the president made a very
important announcement
about telehealth and this is allowing
our 62 million seniors to be able to get
some medical services from the safety of
their home reducing their risk and
without any co-pays but we're also
making sure that the health care system
is prepared and that those on the
frontlines have the support that they
need the reality is the stakes are high
and we need to preserve personal
protective equipment for those that are
on the frontlines of this fight and to
that end we have put out guidelines over
the last two weeks to expand the types
of mass that can be used in routine care
and saving those and 95s for the most
risky situations conserving personal
protective equipment is also essential
to combat the virus so today CMS will
announce detailed recommendations to
further promote this needed conservation
specifically by limiting non-essential
elective medical and surgical procedures
including dental procedures we believe
that these recommendations will help
surgeons patients and hospitals
prioritize what is essential while
leading the ultimate decision in the
hands of state and local health
officials and those clinicians who have
direct responsibility to their patients
and we urge providers and clinicians and
patients to seriously consider these
recommendations they will not only
preserve equipment but it also allows
doctors and nurses to help those that
are on the frontlines and it will
protect patients from unnecessary
exposure to the virus we fully
appreciate that this is going to have a
major impact on the health care system
but the shared sacrifice is essential to
help those that are on the frontlines
and I want to thank the medical
societies such as the American College
of Surgeons and the
American Dental Association that took a
proactive approach and already posted
these recommendations and we've also
talked to the American Medical
Association and they have fully
indicated their support for this
recommendation we now invite the entire
healthcare community to join us in this
effort
thank you Thank You mr. president my
instructions from the president were
very clear I was to do everything
imaginable as aggressively as possible
to protect the nine and a half million
veterans who are part of the Department
of Veterans Affairs
last month we established 19 Emergency
Operations centers across the country we
began to limit the number of visitors
who entered our facilities we began I
think the first we were the first system
to begin triaging across the country and
our 170 hospitals the entrance of anyone
into our facility without being
questioned or tested we expanded those
restrictions to those you know 135
community living centers which which
have about 7800 veterans who are in
acute and acute conditions to make sure
that they were protected we also took
the next step and made sure that we
limited the dental surgeries that we
were provided we've cut back by 1/3 the
number of routine appointments we have
had and we have canceled elective
surgeries these were all part the
president's directive to be as
aggressive in a public health sense as
we could be and I think we have set the
pace for the entire country I will say
we've often said that we work the most
noble mission in the federal government
our veterans have been in the toughest
spots in the world they have been put in
conditional conditions that are
unimaginable to most Americans and they
have responded they've responded clearly
they have responded with passion and
also the 400,000 members of our
department who are out there on the
frontlines the last thing I will say is
that you've heard a lot of
the fourth mission that VA has our first
three missions are health care benefits
and memorial Affairs our fourth mission
is to support the federal government in
times of natural disasters and pandemics
we are the the buttress force in case
that FEMA or HHS calls upon us to deploy
medical professionals across the country
to meet crises but we plan for that
every day we are gaming out emergency
preparedness scenarios and we we stand
ready when the president needs us to
expand our mission potential for what
could come and he said that unemployment
could skyrocket to 20 percent are we
looking that that could rival the Great
Depression are we looking at potentially
[Music]
yeah no I don't agree that's a absolute
total worst-case scenario but no we
don't look at that at all
we're nowhere near it okay why do you
keep calling this the Chinese virus
there are reports of dozens of incidents
of bias against Chinese Americans in
this country your own a secretary a czar
and says he does not use this term
because ethnicity does not cause the
virus why do you keep using this becomes
enjoyable it's not racist at all no not
at all it comes from China
that's why comes from China I want to be
accurate
yeah please John I have a great I have
great love for all of the people from
our country but as you know China tried
to say at one point maybe this stuff now
that it was caused by American soldiers
that can't happen it's not gonna happen
not as long as I'm president it comes
from China John Kriss
two questions if I could mr. president
first of all in the defense procurement
Act you're invoking it today senator
Sharia said on the floor a short time
ago that it urgently needs to be put
into action to produce medical supplies
particularly ventilators do you have
some targets that you would like to see
immediately spool up on we do have we
have tremendous numbers of enta letters
but there's never been an instance like
this where no matter what you have it's
not enough that would be the case and we
will be it's it's being signed it's
essentially drawn and I'm going to sign
it in just a little while if we need to
use it we'll be using it at full speed
ahead
we need to be absent we're going to know
whether or not urgent but we will yeah
we do have targets we have targets for
certain pieces of equipment we have
targets for masks you know the masks and
numbers of basks are incredible we've
ordered millions of them but we need
millions more this a thing like this has
never been requested and it's never
we've never had even think in terms of
these numbers but we need millions of
masks and all of that will be order we
need respirators we need ventilators is
a big thing because it's a complex piece
of equipment so we have a lot of metal
edges but we're going to be ordering
what size will the checks be that will
be sent out to be determined we're
working with the Senate right now we're
working with everybody on Capitol Hill
there's been tremendous there really has
been I mean with with some exceptions
obviously because it's always the way it
is but there has been they've been
getting along very well Republicans and
Democrats it's a nice thing very
bipartisan so forth what we're gonna see
I don't want to get into that right now
John we we are looking at different
numbers we're looking at timing that
would be different splitting the time
splitting the payments we're looking at
a lot of different things hasn't been
determined yet but it will shortly be
determined and people want to go big as
opposed everybody seems to want to go
big and they want to get to the recovery
the big day is the big thing we can do
is get rid of this horrible I call it
the unseen the unseen enemy you call it
view is if that was in different terms
for it but what it snuck up on us and it
it did 128 countries I think it's in
something like that very close to that
think of that so it spreads violently
it's a very contagious
very very contagious virus American to
be on a wartime footing in terms of
fighting this virus I do I actually do
I'm looking at it that way because you
know if it got out of control the big
thing we did was a very early stoppage
of people coming in who could be very
very heavily infected that was a it was
a very good move and it was very early
very very early when most people
including a lot of professionals they
didn't want us to do it that really
saved a lot of lives and yeah I look at
it I view it as a in a sense of wartime
president I mean that's what we're
fighting I mean it's a it's a it's a
very tough situation you're you have to
do things you have to you have to close
parts of an economy that six weeks ago
were were the best they've ever been we
had the best economy we've ever had and
then one day you have to close it down
in order to defeat this enemy and but
we're doing it and we're doing it well
and I'd say the American people have
been incredible for the most part
they've been really incredible yeah
please you just said there are a
tremendous number of ventilators that we
have but for weeks
hospitals have been warning about a
critical shortage that they say we are
not prepared for so why did it take so
long well you know hospitals are
supposed to have ventilators too and
when we have thousands of ventilators it
sounds like a lot but this is a very
unforeseen thing nobody ever thought of
these numbers nobody ever saw numbers
like this even with regard to testing
normally we wouldn't be doing testing
and they decided to do it very very hard
to ramp up now we're getting highly
sophisticated tests and it's going very
well but nobody's ever heard of testing
in the kind of quantities that you're
talking about but well it depends it
depends on how it goes
worst case absolutely the best case not
not at all so we're gonna have to see
where it goes but we are ordering
thousands and thousands of ventilators
and they're complex you know these are
complex machines and but we're ordering
up does anybody have a
maybe you do how many do we have you
know the number we have a specific
number of ventilators in the stockpile
it's in excess of of 10,000 and you just
heard the announcement from the
Department of Defense they'll be adding
several more thousand to that but
president even this morning and
yesterday afternoon speaking with the
largest companies in the supply chain in
this country we're hearing a tremendous
spirit among industry leaders who are
ready to step in and add to that volume
the stockpiles don't count all of the
ventilators that exist today in the
marketplace and in health care
facilities around the country but the
president's given us a a director to
make sure that our stockpile but just as
importantly working with industry
leaders that were securing the increase
in ventilators the increase in mass
gloves
iron protective care garments that are
all necessary to lean forward and we're
confident we'll be able to accomplish
that with the incredible cooperation of
the supply chain that exists in America
today we can give you will give it to
you but we're ordering we're ordering a
lot more one second one second gate and
we'll do it what was the tipping point
Friday we talked about it that Monday
you said no one who were not considering
no I said not yet I spoke with the prime
minister Trudeau very good relationship
obviously between us and our two
countries and no tipping point it's just
that we want to we want to isolate from
the standpoint we don't want people
coming into contact because that's the
way we're going to win this war that is
so important and we both thought it was
sudden now it's not affecting trade it's
non-essential it's non-essential
crossings it won't affect trade at all
and it was just something we thought
would be good for both countries yes
please
the virus how can you be sure that trade
and everything that's being shipped from
one side well they're doing it in a very
careful manner you can only be vigilant
and very professional but we're not it's
not pertaining at this moment to trade
between the two countries yeah please
yeah about the trillion-dollar economic
stimulus package could look something
like 50 billion for the airlines 150
billion dollars in loan guarantees in
critical sectors of the economy a 250
billion dollar payment on April 6th
directly to individuals another 250
billion dollar payments on May 18 again
directly to individuals and as well 300
billion dollars for small business loan
guarantees is that in the general sense
what could be could be and we're also
playing with a lot of numbers a lot of
very big numbers and a lot of very small
numbers frankly we want to take care of
we have to help everybody it was
nobody's fault this happened I mean some
people could say it was somebody's fault
actually but it was nobody's fault and
certainly none of these companies that
all of a sudden had no passengers and
planes and had no passengers on cruise
ships and all of the things that have
happened but I will say that they can't
be blamed for this and we want to keep
those companies vibrant because it's
going to be a comeback very very quickly
as soon as this is solved and it will be
solved we will win and there will be a
comeback and it'll take place very
quickly there's give or take
330 million Americans or so you just do
the math on that that's about 750
dollars a person a family of four that
would be about three thousand dollars on
average again rough rough math which is
that where this is no I don't want to
say that because it's a moving these are
all every number that you mentioned yes
we've talked about those numbers we're
also moving those numbers in both
directions so we'll let you know it'll
be it's it's moving along fast again
there's a great bipartisan effort going
on that that I haven't really seen
before to this extent
no they're looking at it they look it's
down the line and they're looking at it
very seriously and I think would be a
great thing because the others to use a
nice word it's very inconvenient it's
very tough Fraser you tweeted this
morning about your approval rating
amongst Republicans you have said that
you give yourself a ten in terms of
handling this crisis how do you reassure
Americans at home who don't trust you to
handle a crisis of this magnitude well I
think we're doing a really good job we
started off with a termination of the
border the people coming in from China
where this all started
that meant I took it very seriously and
when I use the word calm calm doesn't
mean that I'm not taking it seriously
calm means and we should be calm we
should be extremely calm but yeah ninety
five percent within the Republican Party
and over fifty percent and I also have
we have very great approval numbers I
mean people like the job that we're
doing and when you can't compare this to
other epidemics or if you want to use a
different term you can but within this
country and you look at what's happened
over the years this is being handled
very very professionally we're the
greatest professionals in the world
we're doing a good job
nobody has ever been swamped like this
and nothing's been so contagious the
level of contagion has been incredible
actually nobody's seen anything quite
like this yeah Peter go ahead millions
of tests as you and your colleagues have
said why is the federal government's s
of only fifteen fifty nine thousand
tests been processed to this point we
just heard from the Atlanta public
health director saying that they have
fewer than 50 test kits for more than
nine hundred thousand citizens where
Lois I'll let Mike so that's a very
critical question and thank you for
asking it so the test kits that we put
out last week through the approval the
rapid movement of that meeting that
President Trump called less than two
weeks ago that has resulted in bringing
our private sector to the table because
the tests and the platform that was out
there
only run between four and twelve tests
per platform per day we've now moved
into platforms that can run basically
tens of thousands of tests per day so
yeah the reason I'm grateful for your
question because it allows me to point
out that a course then there was backlog
there were individuals who had been
tested who hadn't have their specimen
run because of the slow throughput it's
now in a high-speed platform so we will
see the number of people diagnosed
dramatically increase over the next four
to five days I know some of you will use
that to raise an alarm that we are worse
than Italy because of our slope of our
curve to every American out there it
will be five to six days worth of tests
being run in 24 to 48 hours
so our curves will not be stable until
sometime next week the reason I talked
about thermo Fisher yesterday is because
their platform is in two thousand
laboratories they're the ones that are
putting out the million tests this week
that will solve the issue that atlanta
and others have brought up I wanted to
be clear we prioritize the areas we do
county-by-county analyses based on those
analyses on what counties had more than
50 cases we prioritize the test kits we
put out the 400,000 and that's why we're
seeing a seven percent plus positivity
rate we'll be able to expand that
platform and reprioritize based on the
accessibility of the other kids
follow-up Howard non-systematic
professional athletes getting tests
while others are waiting in line and
can't get them do the well-connected go
to the front of the line well that you'd
have to ask them that question I mean
the
no I wouldn't say so but perhaps that's
been the story of life that does happen
on occasion and I've noticed where some
people have been tested fairly quickly
look we inherited a very excuse me
excuse me we inherited a very obsolete
system this was a system that was
out-of-date obsolete or it was a system
that was never meant to take care of the
kind of quantity the number of people
that we're talking about millions and
millions of people if you go back in
years past like even recently with the
flu
nobody had tests before they didn't test
the entire nation to see whether or not
they had flu they got the flu they got
better hopefully they got better that
was it now all of a sudden they do this
very complex testing what we've done is
we broken it down we broken up the
system but it was obsolete and or you
could say it was also a system that just
wasn't meant to handle the kind of
volley the volume that you're talking
about we've rebuilt it into a system
that for the future will be a very good
system if you want to go this route but
this was never done before and I would
imagine it will be done in the future
but we built it into a very good system
by using private companies the great
private companies and I have to say
Roches been doing a very good job they
of doing a lot of work a very good job
but this was an obsolete system this was
not a system that was meant to do
anything like this or even near this is
calling on you to suspend tariffs with
other countries as part of the response
to the corona virus who heads that group
those countries do go check it's an
american free trade I know I'm sure a
free trade look China is paying us
billions and billions of dollars in
tariffs and there's no reason to do that
they haven't even spoken to me about
that China hasn't asked me to do that
but we're getting billions of dollars
here from tariffs from China and I can't
imagine Americans asking for that but it
could be the China will ask for a
suspension or something though see what
happens
China's having a very rough time they
have their worst year in 76 years as I
understand it
they have a very very tough time and
then on top of it this happened with the
virus but no we're taking in billions of
dollars a year in tariffs and this was
caused by something totally unrelated to
tariffs asylum seekers and people who
crossed the southern border illegally
are you planning to invoke 42 USC 265
which would allow you to prohibit entry
of certain people inches yes very soon
probably today well I think essential is
medical we have military working
together we have industry working
together and again it's not affecting
trade so things like that but just
leisurely let's go to a restaurant that
have dinner which a lot of people do
they come both ways they go in both
directions that kind of thing we we have
ended on a temporary basis yeah please
go ahead
not close that no we're not gonna close
it but we are invoking a certain
provision that will allow us great
latitude as to what we do please go
ahead you know what go buy something
because just a week ago
um you all were standing here telling us
that unless you had sustained contact
with somebody who was symptomatic for
koban 19 you really didn't need to work
you told the president the vice
president that if they shook hands with
somebody who had this if they took a
photograph with with somebody who had
this he didn't really need to worry and
yet several days later we're in a
situation where people are being told
don't leave your houses there are curfew
saying you cannot walk alone at night
after a certain time you don't walk us
through what seemed like a very dramatic
swing a very dramatic disconnect from
what we were hearing before
right now so two things we look at data
all the time and I know you're looking
at the China and South Korea data and
when you look at China and South Korea
data and you look what China and South
Korea did you can see that their curves
are not only blunted outside of Wuhan so
the Chinese areas outside of Wuhan
blunted curve and South Korea blunted
curve if you look at their curve today
they're already on the far end of their
epidemic curve of course none of those
countries are fully back to work and so
that's what we worry about too secondly
there was a series of scientific
articles published and I know you've
seen them too about surface
contamination I think none of us really
understood the level of surface piece so
we're still working out how much is it
by human human transmission and how much
is it by surface this is why those
fundamental guidelines were put out that
says don't expose yourself to surfaces
outside the home basically what those
guidelines are is don't expose yourself
to excess number of persons who could be
asymptomatic and infected and then the
person-to-person contact and don't
expose yourself to surfaces that could
have had the virus on it for which on
hard surfaces I know we had the
cardboard issue about shipping hard
surfaces not shown in fabric as much or
in cardboard but hard surfaces
transmission these are issues that we
haven't had to deal with before with a
level of respiratory infections and
that's why we have this concern and
that's why the president put out the
guidelines and so it's to cover both of
those pieces that's all new science all
new models I think many of you have the
Imperial study available and looked at
the impact of those that's the first
time those have been modeled as a
comprehensive approach to mitigating an
epidemic
The Wall Street Journal is reporting
that the administration was looking with
an executive order that would expand the
use of investigational drugs scientists
are warning that this could put patients
at risk I have a senior now I haven't
seen the article we will we are making a
lot of progress therapeutically I will
say that and but I have not seen that
article now we've shut down
non-essential travel to Canada
are you considering shutting down I'll
travel to Brunt the spread of the virus
and we've heard from industries like the
airlines who are seeking relief
what other industries or what how
exactly is your administration I'm going
to determine which industries and
businesses well there are certain
industries that people know the airlines
would be number one if you look at
what's going on they go from having the
best year they've ever had to having no
passengers because of what we've had to
do in order to win this war it's a war
and so you know basically you know what
many of the industries are what we want
to do is we want to make sure they all
stay together so that after the war is
won we can immediately go right back up
to where we were and even beyond I think
we're going to go beyond where we were a
lot of people are saying that by the way
we're poised to do that but we have to
win the war first yeah please go ahead
fifty billion dollars today for those
industries but their proposal doesn't
detail which industries we get that
money and how much so aside from the
airlines which you just mentioned what
about the cruise industry the hotels how
much of that money do you see them use
we're talking about all of it haven't
detailed it yet we have detailed it two
senators and two members of the House we
have been talking about it and we're
coming up with numbers haven't gotten
there yet
but certainly hotel industry the cruise
ship industry the airlines those are all
prime candidates episode
[Music]
reporter sir when you say to each boy
the northern border when you say
temporary which is what you said in your
tweet did that mean 30 days I would say
30 days and hopefully at the end of 30
days we'll be in great shape
perhaps not taking some of these
warnings as seriously as you would like
some of those people also seem to be
your supporters and conservatives who
may be quoting some of what you said at
the beginning of this comparing it to
the flu what is your message to them to
really follow what you've been saying so
far and are you concerned that they're
still listening maybe to some of your
earlier comments rather than your more
recent ones well I think my earlier
comments to become I mean I do want
people to become because we're gonna win
this and we're gonna win it it's just a
question of time and I wanted to go
quickly so based on the fact that I
wanted to go quickly I hope they just
listen to what we've been saying over
the last period of time we don't want
them gathering and I see they do gather
including on beaches and including in
restaurants young people they don't
realize they're feeling invincible I
don't know if you felt invincible when
you were very young but they were
feeling totally invincible or are
feeling that way but they don't realize
that they can be carrying lots of bad
things home to grandmother and
grandfather and even their parents so we
want them to heed the advice we mean the
advice said I think it's getting through
I do believe it's getting through Jim I
think the advice heed the advice I just
said yeah thank you thank you Peter
say it he was rather talking about China
you've been very clear about who you
think it's a blame or where the origins
are going for this viruses nothing no no
I don't think I know who where it came
from I don't know if you'd say China is
to blame certainly we didn't get an
early run on it it would have been
helpful if we knew about it earlier but
it comes from China and it's not a
question about that nobody's questioning
that saying that they should be punished
in so many words for inflicting this on
the American people do you feel that way
about I have a lot of respect for Tom
cotton and I know exactly what he's been
saying and there were those people that
say that so we'll see what happens thank
you so nice takes a long time it's your
time thanks sir we've seen the Chinese
government kick out reporters from The
Wall Street Journal the New York Times
The Washington Post what is your message
to the Chinese when it comes to
transparency and a moment we still have
reporters asking you questions here at
the White House yeah I'm not happy to
see it I don't you know I have my own
disputes with all three of those media
groups I think you know that very well
but I don't like seeing that at all I'm
not happy about that at all yes do you
believe that China is inflicting this
upon our country no I don't believe
they're inflicting I think they could
have given us a lot earlier notice
absolutely I'm asking because I see that
they're very high you know if you look
I'm ninety five percent of the
Republican Party we just had a poll that
was done by a very reputable group where
I'm beating sleepy Joe Biden by a lot in
Florida in the state of Florida and in
other states you know so I don't really
know who you're talking about hi
Jennifer go ahead please
explain to them what's coming what was
there and they explained to me where
they're coming from I mean they went
from as I said full planes packed the
best year they've ever had by far to
bomb one day
empty because of what we have to do to
get rid of to win this war or we would
have a level of death like people
haven't seen before
so they've been fantastic I mean they've
been great but you know they went from
being extremely happy to being people
that are running companies that are
gonna need some help and we'll help them
Jennifer would you be willing to give us
an update on how that's going we've been
getting some reports that counties have
been having difficulty getting what's
going I mean there's a lot of influx to
those loans as you could imagine a lot
of people are looking at it but we're
gonna be increasing funding a lot
they're very well prepared to do what
they have to do and the SBA is doing a
fantastic job she is doing a really good
job the administrator just dr. Burton
Frank researchers have had some luck
with hydroxychloroquine in shortening
the duration of disease is that
something that might be in the arsenal
of therapeutics here in the United
States
I think we're exploring every one of
those issues on the president asked for
a critical briefing on that today he
opened with that it is more than that
single drug there are other drugs that
individuals are looking at just to go
back to what we talked about many times
there is things that look really good in
cell culture against the virus that may
look good in small animals and then
don't have an impact in humans and so
those are the pieces that we're looking
at very carefully of course there's
always antidotal reports and we're
trying to figure out how many Ana Dodos
reports equal real scientific
breakthroughs are you confident of the
seasonality of
all we can do is look at the path to
inform the future we know what's ours
looked like we also know and I just want
to put this out I know you can get it
online look at the curve in China and
look at the curve in South Korea those
curves were accomplished and still the
winter season and so we're trying to
understand what those relationships are
we're very interested in the curves in
Italy because of their different
approach and we're following every
single country's curves and so all we
can do is look at prior coronavirus and
prior respiratory infection RNA viruses
these are RNA viruses when you look at
flu in the northern hemisphere when you
look at pair influenza and some of the
other cold viruses and if you look at
SARS that's the way the peak normally
occurs but that is a November to April
we all started later and so you're
asking me to predict based on a later
start and that's what we're trying to
really look at China and South Korea to
really inform them those that have
needed to be tested we believe we've
caught most of them right now we have 44
veterans who have tested positive sadly
one has passed in Portland we are
working with state labs and private
companies to make sure that testing is
available because the president had us
out aggressively early we have we have
been in a better place than most health
care systems in the country I cannot
predict this dr. Burke said when the
next surge will be if it will be but one
of the things that we do at VA is that
we prepare for national emergencies be
the national disasters or epidemics we
started preparing for this we started
stockpiling equipment
our equipment is stable and I think
that's in large part because the
instructions the president we've tested
several hundred I can't give you the
dirty yeah we've tested several hundred
yes we've tested several I don't know
exactly I do know that forty four
veterans have the virus
most of those are quarantined at home
for doctor burns quickly I'm trying to
understand what we it's about the
mortality rate yesterday we underlined
the fact that we had reached a hundred
deaths and this morning we wake up and
were a hundred ten and within 12 hours
we climb by ten percent is it something
we have to expect from now on a ten
percent increase every 12 hours so very
early on in each one of these cases if
you look at all of the countries to date
the mortality is higher at the beginning
because you're diagnosing the sickest
the ones who came in quite ill and I
just want to remind the American public
that's still the majority the risk for
serious illness and the majority of
Americans are low but that doesn't mean
that you can't transmit it to one of
those higher risk groups and that's why
we're asking for all Americans to take
responsibility you're seeing mortality
or deaths today from infections that
occurred two to three weeks ago in
general the other thing that you're
seeing is the dramatic and very
difficult impact of this virus in
nursing homes and that's why very early
on the president and vice president had
us come out and CMS put those very
strict rules in place and everybody
thought we were being too strict and
keeping loved ones away from their
family at nursing homes if we're going
to solve this with a lower death rate we
have to protect the elderly because of
their percent is much higher in
mortality than any other age group
go ahead please reporting that the
federal government has a plan that shows
that this coronavirus outbreak might
laugh as much as long as 18 months are
you seeing those numbers could my second
question is there are some at least one
White House official who use the term
come flu referring to the fact that this
virus started in China is that
acceptable is it wrong are you worried
that that having this virus being talked
about as as a Chinese virus that that
might wonder who should wait you know
who said that
but would you can use the facts say the
time again a person at the White House
you used it to Crystal John the flu my
question is don't where that's wrong
come flu and do you think using the term
Chinese virus that puts asian-americans
no no I think they probably would agree
with it a hundred percent
it comes from China there's nothing not
to agree okay how about the last
question switching gears to a larger
question here we've seen that before the
pandemic there were a lot of Americans
that were already alienated we saw a
deaths of despair increasing through
suicide and other things now is these
individuals a lot of times in rural
parts of the country are self isolating
what is your message to those
individuals and what do you hope that
individuals communities and churches
will be able to return my messages to
all Americans but to those Americans who
are going through a lot we love them
we're with them and we will not let them
down thank you all very much
president trunk including another news
conference another briefing on where
this country stands right now and its
response to the coronavirus number of
headlines there the defense production
act now has been enacted and that is
going to free up a lot of material mm
operating of ventilators in the
Department of Defense as well as field
hospitals will go in we're hearing also
reports of more testing even though
there are plenty of anecdotal evidence
that people are still having trouble
getting tested the president said people
without symptoms should not be tested
also news that the two military hospital
ships massive floating hospitals if you
will will be pressed into action at some
point one will be ultimately make its
way to the New York area the other not
clear yet it's based in San Diego the
president I think made a reference to a
West Coast destination for that that in
anticipation of a larger need as this
goes on we also heard deborah birx who's
coordinating the White House response
who noted that we are going to see that
curve the number of infections climb
very rapidly she did point out that is
gonna be largely because we're gonna be
seeing more testing and thus more people
will be popping up on the radar let me
bring in our chief medical correspondent
dr. John Torres right now John a lot of
medical headlines there break down what
stood out to you so the main things that
stood out to me are like you said
there's a couple different areas one is
the resources they're marshalling right
now and that's the hospital ships are
talking about the tents the ventilators
they're also letting doctors cross state
lines which has not been possible before
because our licenses are state based and
that can get doctors to areas where
they're needed but on top of that the
second part of this where the warnings
they gave out and like you mentioned
they're saying because of Italy and
France data that we have right now it
looks like 20 and 30 year olds the
Millennials are a group that had that
have been hit hard there which is not
the same thing we saw in China or South
Korea they're saying the reason behind
that is because they're the ones that
weren't taking the message to stay away
from each other in social distance that
are disproportionately getting hit with
it which pushes the numbers higher of
those that die or get critical
conditions from it on top like you said
they're also saying over the next four
or five days we're going to see a huge
increase in numbers so don't be too
alarmed by that because we know that's
going to happen and they're making a
plea to everybody
save the personal protection equipment
the PPE for health care workers they
needed on the frontlines and those are
the ones that really need it at this
point John I do have to quickly ask you
I think it was dr. Burks made the point
that there is still there's still some
confusion as to how this is transmitted
whether it is in the air or whether it's
on the surface of this desk or any other
hard surface a lot of us are trying to
do everything we're supposed to be doing
but how long before they get a handle on
the transmission and we're getting a
better handle as time goes on you're
referring to where they asked about
President Trump and them saying you know
him shaking hands wasn't a big deal and
now they're saying that we know that
that can transmit it a lot more than we
thought we originally thought
respiratory illness is transmitted
through the air by people coughing or
sneezing on contact not so much and now
we're knowing now we know that that
contact is a bigger part than we thought
it was and so you have to be careful of
both and that means essentially that
social distancing and making sure you
wash your hands before you touch your
face bottom line all right doctor thanks
let's go to Peter Alexander right now
who was in that news briefing with the
president what stood out to you people
here yeah right out of the gates we
heard from the president saying that he
would be invoking the defense production
Act that allows the federal government
to marshal the resources of the private
sector to produce those emergency
supplies that may be needed another
headline he was hoping to make here was
the discussion of efforts to produce a
self swab that would allow people to
test themselves without the potential
impact on those health care workers who
have to Dero Banri robe after and every
individual test that they take to this
point but I asked the president
point-blank about this issue of testing
and why when South Korea was doing
10,000 tests a day through this much
time America has only processed 59
thousand tests you remember 12 days ago
the president said anybody who wants a
test could get one clearly that has not
been the case they spoke obviously about
that backlog and the hope that these
tests will ramp up very quickly that's
frustrated a lot of people and I
followed up by asking him why non
symptomatic asymptomatic professional
athletes who have been able to get tests
as we've witnessed in the end
and elsewhere while other Americans
continue to wait in line frustrated they
haven't had a chance to get their tests
the president said it should not be that
way but he said perhaps that's the story
of life whether there was enough
information here for those small
business owners who were waiting at home
right now with fear that their bars
restaurants bodegas can't go days let
alone weeks like this the president said
that they're still trying to get those
small business loans sorted out for the
frustration at home for a lot of
Americans continues today Lester all
right Peter things I want to stand
corrected I mentioned those to hospital
ships that may be press into action
apparently the plan is to have them
relieve other patients from hospitals to
allow those hospitals to address the
corona virus outbreak let me go to
Stephanie ruhle right now our chief
business correspondent Stephanie we've
been accustomed for watching these
briefings and watching the ticker in the
corner nothing that's that's making Wall
Street feel good right now absolutely
not we watch stocks plummet again
they've gone down 7% in the S&P which
means the circuit breakers have been
triggered this is the fourth time in
recent weeks we have seen this this
happens in emergencies scenarios at this
point all of the stock market gains
since President Trump took office have
been lost and it's stunning when you
look at it because this is when they're
presenting sort of the rescue package
that 50 billion dollars in checks going
to the American people what they're
going to do for small businesses and the
third rescuing 50 55 0 billion dollars
for the airline industry and another 50
billion for other industries that are
distressed something I would say to look
out for are the details these corporate
bailouts that we're going to look at
remember in 2008 those bailouts when
they happened
they created the rise of populism they
created Occupy Wall Street so you're
gonna see a lot of public pushing an
outrage for the details here ensuring
that while these industries might need
to be bailed out today the public wants
them bailed out but in a way that helps
workers because that's what was missed
last time around all right Stephanie
ruhle thanks very much we'll of course
continue to follow all developments in
this crisis I'll be back with a complete
wrap-up on NBC Nightly News and his
events warrant will certainly come on
the
and bring them to you immediately I'm
Lester Holt NBC News New York a day
everyone
you